# Brunel-Project

RNA structure in health and disease - investigation of snoRNA cluster in the imprinted Dlk1-Dio3 region

Russell Hamilton & Anne Ferguson-Smith
Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EH

The epigenetic phenomenon of genomic imprinting leads to specific genes being expressed in a parent-specific manner. Imprinted genes have key roles in placenta and embryo development, as well as an emerging role in brain development and function. The Dlk1-Dio3 imprinted region contains two maternally expressed small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) clusters, SNORD113 & SNORD114, containing 9 and 31 copies respectively (10.1016/j.tig.2008.03.011). Human patients with disruptions in this conserved region display growth retardation and facial dysmorphism (10.1038/ng.2007.56). However little is known about the mechanism of action of the snoRNAs in this region. Deletion of the related SNORD116 cluster (paternally expressed) in the SNRPN imprinted region has been shown to be a direct cause of Prader-Willi syndrome and postnatal growth retardation (10.1038/ng.158; 10.1371/journal.pgen.0030235). 

Using open source computational tools we will model the snoRNA 2D and 3D structures of the Dlk1-Dio3 region (10.7490/f1000research.1117078.1). Transcribed as a precursor long non-coding RNA, Rian/MEG8, the C/D box motif containing snoRNAs have been shown to be directed by genomic imprinting and, unusually for snoRNAs, to have brain specific expression. snoRNA have previously been shown to contain Ca2+ sensitive kink-turn (KT) motifs. In low Ca2+, the KTs are in an extended confirmation, but with increased Ca2+ develop a pronounced 60o kink, opening up the nucleotide bases for sequence specific recognition. KT motifs can therefore act as a Ca2+ sensitive switch for mediating protein or tertiary RNA interactions. The brain specific expression of these C/D snoRNAs and demonstration of the existence of calcium sensitive KT motifs would provide valuable insight into these enigmatic snoRNAs and their role in the nervous system. 
